My father always warned me about telling people that we are Arabs even though he has lived in the US most of his life. He even gave us Christian first names and changed the spelling of our last names because he was worried that we would be ‘outed’ as Arabs. During middle school, I did not understand why this was a bad thing nor did I believe him.
At lunch one day, a boy asked if I wanted to sit with him and his friends. With this action, I was invited to join a friend group. During the first few months of hanging out with them, we would discuss football, video games, and other topics. We would make fun of each other and laugh about it. “one-v-one me in basketball, I’ll crush you,” said one of the kids. It was just fun banter--or so I thought.
One day I casually mentioned that I was an Arab. As time went on, conversations went from harmless joking to thinly veiled insults, and finally to outright bullying. Not fully comprehending what was happening, I continued having lunch with them even though their joking at me, rather than with me, worsened over time. In one instance, they yelled, “Shut up before I deport your ass back to Iraq!” Students at the table burst into laughter while I wondered what was so funny. “It's just a joke, bro,” he said. I fake-laughed to fit in. For the first time, I realized that this was exactly what my father had always warned me about.
The turning point came when my “friends” smacked the lunch tray out of my hands. With my food on the floor, I had to buy lunch twice. A teacher, who presented often on bullying prevention, simply stood there and did not intervene even though it happened right in front of them. I felt confused, angry, and helpless. My parents noticed the duplicate lunch charges. When they asked about it, I told them that I was just hungry. 
I cannot change my ethnicity or the look of my hair, but I am, however, an optimistic person and proud of my background. It was at that moment that I chose not to be a victim, but an agent of change. I developed an internal set of guiding principles for tolerance, inclusion, and immediate acceptance regardless of race, ethnicity, or gender identity.
With this new internal compass guiding me, it was an easy decision to disassociate myself with those who did not share the same beliefs. However, it was not easy for me to face them and end the “friendship” because I worried that their bullying would only intensify. Staying true to my principals, I built up enough courage to tell them that their racist behavior was unacceptable and that they did not deserve my time or my friendship. They were startled at being called out for racism because they did not see it that way. They never bothered me again.
That day was a new beginning for me and I have lived every day since then based on the person I want to be--not as how others defined me. I formed new friendships where we embrace diversity and do not bully, make fun of, or shame others into believing there is something wrong with having a different background. A common trait among our group is the awareness that xenophobia still exists in our society. For instance, my friends and I called out other kids for their racist remarks towards our Indian friend. I joined the Asian Student Union club at school (and became its treasurer), whose sole mission is to inform and educate others of the discriminatory atmosphere that still prevails in our society. These changes made me a better person and more importantly, influenced others around me.
I now understand my father’s warning, but I do not live in fear of it.